.. _Getting Started:

###############
Getting Started
###############

Documentation
=============

Visit the `RDHPCS CommonDocs page
<https://rdhpcs-common-docs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=Start>`_ for
information on HPC processes and activities. This page also provides links to
system-specific documentation.

Maintenance Schedule
====================

System maintenance will affect access to RDHPCS systems. Click `here
<https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/1/r?cid=bm9hYS5nb3ZfZjFnZ3U0M3RtOWxmZWVnNDV0NTlhMDYzY3NAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ>`_
to view the RDHPCS Maintenance Downtime Calendar.

Getting Access
==============

This figure is an overview of the timeline and process for system access.

.. image:: /images/access1.png

Once you have  a NOAA.gov email address, you can request an RDHPCS account.
Visit the `Account Information Management (AIM) website
<https://aim.rdhpcs.noaa.gov>`_ and  request access to the RDHPCS project.  Log
into AIM using your NOAA email credentials, review your profile for accuracy,
and request the RDHPCS project.

.. image:: /images/AIM2.png

Once this request is approved, you will receive an email containing instructions
about your next steps. These include requesting access to further projects and
completing the RSA token request form.  Confer with your supervisor and
colleagues to identify the  project(s) to request.

RSA Software Token
------------------

RSA software tokens provide two factor authentication (2FA) for NOAA RDHPCS
systems for SSH access. When you’re assigned to your first project, the RSA
token form will be used to assign your software token. Your RSA token will
include instructions about how to initialize it. You can find more information
on RSA tokens here: Logging in - rdhpcs-common-docs (noaa.gov). NOTE:  If you
don’t have a smartphone, you can request an RSA hardware token. The activation
process is found here: `New User Activation
<https://rdhpcs-common-docs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php/New_User_Activation#RSA_Token_Activation>`_.
RSA software tokens are preferred.

CAC Access
----------

The Common Access Card (CAC), is the preferred means of access to RDHPCS
resources for both Web and SSH access. To obtain a CAC, work with your local
admin services team as they need to start the application process.  Some labs
can issue CACs on-site, otherwise you will have to visit a RAPIDS site. The site
locator website is `ID Card Office Online
<https://idco.dmdc.osd.mil/idco/locator>`_.  SSH logins with a CAC require
additional software.

Accessing the Systems
=====================

.. note::

    To access a system, you must be on a project assigned to that system.

On-Premise RDHPCS systems (Gaea, Hera, Jet, Niagara, PPAN) are accessed via SSH.
See the following pages for detailed instructions:

* `RSA logins <https://rdhpcs-common-docs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php/RSA_Login>`_
* `CAC logins <https://rdhpcs-common-docs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php/CAC_Login>`_

MSU systems (Orion, Hercules) are accessed via SSH or OpenOnDemand. See `Orion
login: <https://oriondocs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php/Logging_in>`_ for
detailed instructions.

Cloud RDHPCS platforms (AWS, Azure, GCP) are accessed via ParallelWorks in a web
browser.  Login `here. <https://noaa.parallel.works/log>`_

Cloud Computing
---------------

The Cloud Platform allows RDHPCS users to create a high-performance
computational cluster on a cloud-based platform (AWS, Azure or GCP) with
resources that are appropriate for specific processing tasks. Cloud access is
mediated through the Parallel Works application. An overview of the Cloud
workflow, and links to detailed instructions, can be found in `Cloud Computing
User Information.
<https://clouddocs.rdhpcs.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php/Cloud_Computing_User_Information>`_
